# Landing Procedures

## Carrier Landing Pattern (Visual Flight Rules). CASE I

The VFR carrier landing pattern shall be in accordance with the CV NATOPS
Manual. The pattern starts with the level break at 800 feet, and 300 to 350
KIAS. The break interval will be approximately one-half of the desired ramp
interval time (15 to 17 seconds normal interval). When established wings level
on the downwind leg, descend to and fly the pattern at 600 feet MSL. Engage DLC
upon completion of flap extension.

> Note Selection of DLC during the flap extension cycle can generate excessive
> pitch rates. DLC is to be selected only upon completion of the flap cycle. DLC
> must be > deselected prior to flap retraction to avoid an excessive pitch trim
> change with automatic DLC stowage during the flap retraction cycle.

Slow to 15 units AOA or computed on-speed (whichever is faster) and verify
airspeed/AOA correlation. Engage APC if desired, check for proper DLC operation,
and complete the Landing Checklist prior to reaching the 180° position. The 180°
turn is commenced 1 to 1.2 nm abeam the LSO platform to arrive at the 90°
position at approximately 450 to 500 feet MSL. The nominal bank angle throughout
the turn should be 27° to 28°. Glideslope meatball acquisition will occur at
approximately 0.6 nm. Do not descend below 300 feet prior to acquiring the ball.
On rollout to final, slightly overshoot the ship’s wake. Optimum time on
glideslope is approximately 15 to 18 seconds.

• To ensure wind-over-deck requirements are met, the LSO and tower must be
informed if the landing is to be made in any wing, flap, or engine configuration
other than 20° wing sweep, flaps and slats down, and RATS operative. • Unless
field divert is not possible, shipboard landing with inoperative roll SAS and
store asymmetry greater than 170,000 inch-pounds should not be attempted. (e.g.,
weapon rail at station 6 and AIM-54 missile at station 8 equals 170,000
inch-pounds). These conditions increase the danger of lateral pilot-induced
oscillations in the approach.

> Note With the hook down, airspeeds in excess of 320 KIAS may cause the hook
> transition light to illuminate.

## Manual Approach Technique

The rapid engine response characteristics allow the pilot to make timely, small
power changes to make glideslope corrections. Because of the rapid engine
response and high throttle sensitivity, the pilot must avoid over-controlling
power. DLC should be engaged for all approaches. Approaches flown without DLC
will degrade flying qualities resulting in significant glideslope and lineup
deviations. Pitch compensation for DLC inputs is optimized for approach
airspeeds. Activation of DLC at higher airspeeds will induce noticeable changes
in pitch attitude. DLC may be employed by vernier or bang-bang control,
depending on the extent of the correction required. DLC is most effective in
correcting for glideslope deviations caused by gusty conditions or the ship’s
burble. Caution should be taken not to use DLC to compensate for a major
overpowered or underpowered condition.

> CAUTION Caution must be taken to avoid sustained full-down DLC commands for a
> high condition at the ramp as this will result in excessive sink rates and
> subsequent hard landings.

Once established on glideslope, keep the scan going, cross-checking meatball,
lineup, and AOA. Be alert for a waveoff. With rough seas and pitching decks,
some erratic meatball movements may be encountered. If this is the case, average
out meatball movements to maintain a smooth and safe rate of descent. To avoid
being cocked up, arrest a come-down in close with power and up DLC. Attempts to
arrest high sink rates with nose attitude alone could result in landing damage
to the ventral fins and afterburner. Also avoid dropping the nose prior to
touchdown as this significantly increases the chances of a hook skip bolter.
Upon touchdown, add full MIL power, manually retract speedbrakes, and maintain
aft stick pressure to minimize chances of a hook skip bolter. Selection of MIL
power will automatically disengage DLC and retract the speedbrake. A good start
is imperative to minimizing lineup corrections while on the glideslope and will
prevent the tendency to chase lineup. Small coordinated rudder inputs should be
used to reduce the nose yaw that is typically generated by lateral stick inputs.

## Approach Power Compensator (APC) Technique

Practice is required to develop the proper control habits necessary to use APC.
For the APC to perform satisfactorily, smooth attitude control is essential.
Large, abrupt attitude changes result in excessive power changes. APC use is not
recommended in gusty conditions. The APC will over-control AOA fluctuations
resulting in large airspeed and/or glideslope deviations. The APC system was
designed to be used with the engines operating in the primary mode and is not
recommended with either one or both engines in secondary mode.

As the initial turn from the 180° position is made, the aircraft will
momentarily indicate up to 2 units slow. The APC will adjust power to correct
back to on-speed condition throughout the remainder of the turn. Upon rollout on
glideslope, the pilot must override the tendency for the nose to pitch up by
maintaining slight forward stick. The aircraft will indicate 1 to 2 units fast,
which will slow to on-speed within 5 seconds. The use of DLC in conjunction with
small attitude changes to maintain glideslope will minimize AOA deviations and
result in optimal APC performance. Timely use of DLC can also be used to more
rapidly correct from a fast or slow condition. Close-in corrections are very
critical. If a high, in-close situation develops, the recommended procedure is
to stop the meatball motion and not try to recenter it. A low, in-close
condition is difficult to correct with APC and often results in an over-the-top
bolter. It may be necessary to disengage or manually override APC in order to
safely recover from a low in-close situation. Throughout the approach, the pilot
should keep his hand on the throttles in the event APC disengages inadvertently.
A smooth throttle transition from AUTO to BOOST mode can be achieved by
depressing the CAGE button on the outboard throttle grip.

> Note • Approaches that result in steep bank angles (greater than 30°) and/or
> short groove lengths should be avoided because of the large thrust reductions
> required and the short periods of time available to make proper corrections. •
> Disengagement of APC by any means other than the throttle MODE switch, will
> result in illumination of the AUTO THROT light for 10 seconds.

## Direct Lift Control (DLC) Technique

DLC should be engaged for all approaches. DLC is selected upon completion of the
flap extension cycle. When the aircraft is established at approach AOA, the APC
may be engaged and a quick check of the DLC thumbwheel controller is made to
ensure an operable DLC.

> Note Automatic pitch compensation for DLC activation is optimized for approach
> angle-of-attack speeds. Activation of DLC at higher airspeeds will result in
> inducing noticeable changes in pitch attitude.

DLC may be employed by vernier or bang-bang control, depending upon the extent
of correction required. Pilots should be cautious not to overuse DLC or to
attempt to correct glideslope deviations that are the result of major power
airspeed errors. DLC is most effectively used in an overpowered situation, in
close to at the ramp to correct for a high or rising meatball. Selection of MIL
will automatically disengage DLC.

> Note Selection of DLC during the flap extension cycle can generate excessive
> pitch rates. DLC is to be selected only upon completion of the flap cycle. DLC
> must be deselected prior to flap retraction to avoid an excessive pitch trim
> change with automatic DLC stowage during the flap retraction cycle.

## Waveoff Technique

A waveoff shall be initiated immediately upon a signal or voice call from the
LSO. MIL power should be used for all dual-engine waveoffs. Maintain the landing
attitude until a positive rate of climb is established. Do not over rotate the
aircraft in close as this significantly increases the chance of in-flight
engagement.

Dual-engine afterburner waveoffs are prohibited. Inadvertent arrestment or
in-flight engagement in dual-engine afterburner would result in catastrophic
damage to the aircraft and/or arresting gear.

Normally, waveoffs will be taken straight ahead, especially when close in. When
using APC, waveoff technique is the same as for manual approaches except that a
force of approximately 8 pounds is required to disengage the throttle torque
switches. Disengagement of the APC by overriding the throttle forces results in
the throttle MODE switch automatically returning in BOOST and illuminates the
AUTO THROT light on the pilot left-hand ladder light assembly. A time-delay
relay holds the AUTO THROT light on for 10 seconds following APC disengagement.

> CAUTION If a force in excess of 14 pounds is applied to break the throttles
> out of the auto mode, the throttle MODE switch will return to BOOST but the
> throttle mode will revert to manual. The switch must be cycled to MAN and back
> to BOOST to regain the BOOST mode.

## Bolter Technique

The bolter maneuver is effected by selecting MIL and slight aft control stick
until the desired flyaway attitude is established.

> CAUTION The use of excessive back-stick on a bolter may cause the tail surface
> to stall, delaying aircraft rotation and causing the aircraft to settle off
> the angle.

## Bingo Fuel

Fuel reserves should be programmed depending on distance of the field from the
CV, aircraft configuration, and en route weather. This bingo fuel quantity
should be set before takeoff.

## Arrested Landing and Exit from the Landing Area

As the aircraft touches down, advance throttles to MIL. Upon completion of
landing rollout, reduce power to IDLE. Raise the hook and flaps and select
wing-sweep BOMB while allowing the aircraft to roll aft. Apply brakes on signal.
Flap retraction requires approximately 7 seconds. When the flaps are fully
retracted, the wings will sweep aft. Engage nosewheel steering and taxi forward
on the come-ahead signal. If the wings sweep aft to 55°, auxiliary and main flap
retraction has been verified and full-aft wing sweep may be selected using the
emergency handle. The RIO should monitor wing-sweep position while taxiing.
Oversweep should be selected prior to final spot and shutdown. The engines
should remain running until the cut signal is given by the plane director. If at
any time during this phase of operations a brake failure occurs, pull the
parking-emergency brake. If the aircraft continues to roll, drop the hook,
advise the tower, and signal for chocks to be installed (use nosewheel steering
to ensure that the aircraft remains on the deck). Do not unstrap, de-arm the
ejection seat, or leave the cockpit until tie-downs have been installed.
